README.md, before:

# git and Github basics

<!-- @import "[TOC]" {cmd="toc" depthFrom=2 depthTo=6 orderedList=true} -->

<!-- code_chunk_output -->

1. [Preamble](#preamble)
2. [Creating a new project](#creating-a-new-project)
3. [Contributing to an existing project](#contributing-to-an-existing-project)
4. [Commands](#commands)
   1. [Setting up](#setting-up)
   2. [`git init`](#git-init)
   3. [`git add`](#git-add)
   4. [`git commit`](#git-commit)
   5. [`git status`](#git-status)
   6. [`git log`](#git-log)
   7. [`git show`](#git-show)
   8. [`git diff`](#git-diff)
   9. [`git branch`](#git-branch)
   10. [`git checkout`](#git-checkout)
   11. [`git push`](#git-push)
   12. [`git fetch`](#git-fetch)
   13. [`git merge`](#git-merge)
   14. [`git pull`](#git-pull)
   15. [`git remote`](#git-remote)

<!-- /code_chunk_output -->

---

## Preamble

Below you will find the [list of git commands](#commands), the typical workflow for [creating a new project](#creating-a-new-project) as well as the workflow for [contributing to an existing project](#contributing-to-an-existing-project).

The commands to be typed in the terminal will show up like this:

```bash
$ git log
```

(The `$` indicates the prompt)

Please note that the text in `<angle brackets>` should be replaced with your own text.

The sample output of a command will show up like this:

> ```bash
> commit 356f63e55190eb33eb513ff2699259b1a80bd9f3
> Author: Alex Sincai <alex.sincai@yahoo.co.uk>
> Date:   Tue Nov 12 14:50:17 2019 +0200
>
>    Updated style
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

## Creating a new project

Let's start by creating a new project. Create a new folder and add some content; in this case, it will be a python script that computes the area of a circle, given a radius. I shall call this script `area_of_circle.py`.

Navigate to your github page and [create a new repository](https://github.com/new). Give it a name, a description, and click "Create".

Once you have the repository, go to your folder and run `git init` to start tracking this project.

After you have some content, use `git add area_of_circle.py` to let git know about this file.

Create your first commit, by running `git commit -m "Added script"`

Finally, push your changes, so that they are visible to github. Do this with the command `git push origin master`.

For this project, I have created a test suite and created the corresponding commits.

---

## Contributing to an existing project

---

## Commands

### Setting up

`git` (and github) needs to know about you. Run these commands to configure it:

```bash
$ git config --global credential.helper store
$ git config --global user.name "<github username>"
$ git config --global user.email "<github email adress>"
$ git config --global user.password "<github password>"
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git init`

Create or navigate to the folder where you will work, then initialize git

```bash
$ git init
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git add`

Let git know about new / modified files

To add a single file:

```bash
$ git add <file>
```

To add several files:

```bash
$ git add <file 1> <file 2> ... <file n>
```

To add the current folder:

```bash
$ git add .
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git commit`

Have git track the desired files

```bash
$ git commit -m "<descriptive message>"
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git status`

See the status of the files (untracked, new, modified, deleted) on the current branch

```bash
$ git status
```

> ```bash
> On branch master
>
> No commits yet
>
> Untracked files:
>  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
>
> 	index.html
>
> nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git log`

For the current branch, it shows the **commit hash**, author's **name** and **email**, the **date** and the **commit message**

```bash
$ git log
```

> ```bash
> commit 356f63e55190eb33eb513ff2699259b1a80bd9f3
> Author: Alex Sincai <alex.sincai@yahoo.co.uk>
> Date:   Tue Nov 12 14:50:17 2019 +0200
>
>    Updated style
>
> commit 21e40ae300061b7849417f9bc8de783ebb17c7ba
> Author: Alex Sincai <alex.sincai@yahoo.co.uk>
> Date:   Tue Nov 12 14:44:18 2019 +0200
>
>    Added style
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git show`

Shows the details of a certain commit

```bash
$ git show <hash>
```

> ```diff
> commit 356f63e55190eb33eb513ff2699259b1a80bd9f3
> Author: Alex Sincai <alex.sincai@yahoo.co.uk>
> Date:   Tue Nov 12 14:50:17 2019 +0200
>
>    Updated style
>
> diff --git a/style.css b/style.css
> index 371082a..e9ba78b 100644
> --- a/style.css
> +++ b/style.css
> @@ -1,3 +1,5 @@
> body {
>   font: 16px/1.5 sans-serif;
> +  margin: 0;
> +  padding: 0;
> }
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git diff`

When a local file contains changes that do not exist remotely, `diff` will show the differences between versions.

```bash
$ git diff
```

```bash
$ git diff <file>
```

> ```diff
> diff --git a/style.css b/style.css
> index 1bbf05f..33f3834 100644
> --- a/style.css
> +++ b/style.css
> @@ -5,7 +5,5 @@ body {
> }
>
> h1{
> -
> -color:burgundy;
> -
> -}
> \ No newline at end of file
> +  color: burgundy;
> +}
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git branch`

See the list of branches on your repository, or create new ones

Used without arguments, it lists the local branches:

```bash
$ git branch
```

> ```bash
>  color
> * master
> ```

The **\* asterisk** shows the current branch.

Used with the **-a** argument, it also lists the branches that exist remotely:

```bash
$ git branch -a
```

> ```bash
>  color
> * master
>  remotes/origin/HEAD -> origin/master
>  remotes/origin/color
>  remotes/origin/master
> ```

Note the HEAD: it shows that the current branch _for the remote repository_ is the same as the current local branch.

To create a new branch, use

```bash
$ git branch <new name>
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git checkout`

This sets the HEAD to a specified commit hash or branch

To work on a previous commit:

```bash
$ git checkout <hash>
```

> ```bash
> Note: checking out '21e40ae300061b7849417f9bc8de783ebb17c7ba'.
>
> You are in 'detached HEAD' state. You can look around, make experimental
> changes and commit them, and you can discard any commits you make in this
> state without impacting any branches by performing another checkout.
>
> If you want to create a new branch to retain commits you create, you may
> do so (now or later) by using -b with the checkout command again. Example:
>
>  git checkout -b <new-branch-name>
>
> HEAD is now at 21e40ae Added style
> ```

To work on a different branch:

```bash
$ git checkout <branch>
```

> ```bash
> Switched to branch 'color'
> Your branch is up to date with 'origin/color'.
> ```

You can also create a new branch and work on it with:

```bash
$ git checkout -b <new branch name>
```

> ```bash
> Note: checking out '21e40ae300061b7849417f9bc8de783ebb17c7ba'.
>
> You are in 'detached HEAD' state. You can look around, make experimental
> changes and commit them, and you can discard any commits you make in this
> state without impacting any branches by performing another checkout.
>
> If you want to create a new branch to retain commits you create, you may
> do so (now or later) by using -b with the checkout command again. Example:
>
> git checkout -b <new-branch-name>
>
> HEAD is now at 21e40ae Added style
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git push`

This syncs the current local branch to the remote repository, on the same branch

```bash
$ git push -u origin <branch>
```

Please note that **origin** is just a label, it can be called anything (but really shouldn't...). "origin" is just the standard name for the remote repo's URL.

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git fetch`

Gets the content from the remote repository, **without** applying it.

```bash
$ git fetch
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git merge`

Incorporates fetched changes into the current branch

```bash
$ git merge
```

To incorporate a certain commit, use

```bash
$ git merge <hash>
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git pull`

Fetches and merges changes from the remote to the specified branch

```bash
$ git pull origin <name>
```

> ```bash
> From https://github.com/alexsincai/git-github-presentation
> * branch            master     -> FETCH_HEAD
> Updating 21e40ae..78b5fbd
> Fast-forward
> index.html | 2 +-
> style.css  | 8 ++++++++
> 2 files changed, 9 insertions(+), 1 deletion(-)
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git remote`

Lets the local repository know about the remote repository

```bash
$ git remote add origin <URL>
```

As stated above, the name of the remote can be something other than **origin**, but it is that by convention; changing this will cause headaches down the road.

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

Commit message:

Recap list for New Project section

README.md, after:

# git and Github basics

<!-- @import "[TOC]" {cmd="toc" depthFrom=2 depthTo=6 orderedList=true} -->

<!-- code_chunk_output -->

1. [Preamble](#preamble)
2. [Creating a new project](#creating-a-new-project)
3. [Contributing to an existing project](#contributing-to-an-existing-project)
4. [Commands](#commands)
   1. [Setting up](#setting-up)
   2. [`git init`](#git-init)
   3. [`git add`](#git-add)
   4. [`git commit`](#git-commit)
   5. [`git status`](#git-status)
   6. [`git log`](#git-log)
   7. [`git show`](#git-show)
   8. [`git diff`](#git-diff)
   9. [`git branch`](#git-branch)
   10. [`git checkout`](#git-checkout)
   11. [`git push`](#git-push)
   12. [`git fetch`](#git-fetch)
   13. [`git merge`](#git-merge)
   14. [`git pull`](#git-pull)
   15. [`git remote`](#git-remote)

<!-- /code_chunk_output -->

---

## Preamble

Below you will find the [list of git commands](#commands), the typical workflow for [creating a new project](#creating-a-new-project) as well as the workflow for [contributing to an existing project](#contributing-to-an-existing-project).

The commands to be typed in the terminal will show up like this:

```bash
$ git log
```

(The `$` indicates the prompt)

Please note that the text in `<angle brackets>` should be replaced with your own text.

The sample output of a command will show up like this:

> ```bash
> commit 356f63e55190eb33eb513ff2699259b1a80bd9f3
> Author: Alex Sincai <alex.sincai@yahoo.co.uk>
> Date:   Tue Nov 12 14:50:17 2019 +0200
>
>    Updated style
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

## Creating a new project

Let's start by creating a new project. Create a new folder and add some content; in this case, it will be a python script that computes the area of a circle, given a radius. I shall call this script `area_of_circle.py`.

Navigate to your github page and [create a new repository](https://github.com/new). Give it a name, a description, and click "Create".

Once you have the repository, go to your folder and run `git init` to start tracking this project.

After you have some content, use `git add area_of_circle.py` to let git know about this file.

Create your first commit, by running `git commit -m "Added script"`

Finally, push your changes, so that they are visible to github. Do this with the command `git push origin master`.

For this project, I have created a test suite and created the corresponding commits.

To recap:

1. Create a repo on github
2. Navigate to your folder
3. `git init`
4. `git remote add origin <repo URL>`
5. `git add <all relevant files>`
6. `git commit -m "Commit message"`
7. `git push origin master`
8. Repeat from step 5 as needed

---

## Contributing to an existing project

---

## Commands

### Setting up

`git` (and github) needs to know about you. Run these commands to configure it:

```bash
$ git config --global credential.helper store
$ git config --global user.name "<github username>"
$ git config --global user.email "<github email adress>"
$ git config --global user.password "<github password>"
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git init`

Create or navigate to the folder where you will work, then initialize git

```bash
$ git init
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git add`

Let git know about new / modified files

To add a single file:

```bash
$ git add <file>
```

To add several files:

```bash
$ git add <file 1> <file 2> ... <file n>
```

To add the current folder:

```bash
$ git add .
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git commit`

Have git track the desired files

```bash
$ git commit -m "<descriptive message>"
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git status`

See the status of the files (untracked, new, modified, deleted) on the current branch

```bash
$ git status
```

> ```bash
> On branch master
>
> No commits yet
>
> Untracked files:
>  (use "git add <file>..." to include in what will be committed)
>
> 	index.html
>
> nothing added to commit but untracked files present (use "git add" to track)
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git log`

For the current branch, it shows the **commit hash**, author's **name** and **email**, the **date** and the **commit message**

```bash
$ git log
```

> ```bash
> commit 356f63e55190eb33eb513ff2699259b1a80bd9f3
> Author: Alex Sincai <alex.sincai@yahoo.co.uk>
> Date:   Tue Nov 12 14:50:17 2019 +0200
>
>    Updated style
>
> commit 21e40ae300061b7849417f9bc8de783ebb17c7ba
> Author: Alex Sincai <alex.sincai@yahoo.co.uk>
> Date:   Tue Nov 12 14:44:18 2019 +0200
>
>    Added style
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git show`

Shows the details of a certain commit

```bash
$ git show <hash>
```

> ```diff
> commit 356f63e55190eb33eb513ff2699259b1a80bd9f3
> Author: Alex Sincai <alex.sincai@yahoo.co.uk>
> Date:   Tue Nov 12 14:50:17 2019 +0200
>
>    Updated style
>
> diff --git a/style.css b/style.css
> index 371082a..e9ba78b 100644
> --- a/style.css
> +++ b/style.css
> @@ -1,3 +1,5 @@
> body {
>   font: 16px/1.5 sans-serif;
> +  margin: 0;
> +  padding: 0;
> }
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git diff`

When a local file contains changes that do not exist remotely, `diff` will show the differences between versions.

```bash
$ git diff
```

```bash
$ git diff <file>
```

> ```diff
> diff --git a/style.css b/style.css
> index 1bbf05f..33f3834 100644
> --- a/style.css
> +++ b/style.css
> @@ -5,7 +5,5 @@ body {
> }
>
> h1{
> -
> -color:burgundy;
> -
> -}
> \ No newline at end of file
> +  color: burgundy;
> +}
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git branch`

See the list of branches on your repository, or create new ones

Used without arguments, it lists the local branches:

```bash
$ git branch
```

> ```bash
>  color
> * master
> ```

The **\* asterisk** shows the current branch.

Used with the **-a** argument, it also lists the branches that exist remotely:

```bash
$ git branch -a
```

> ```bash
>  color
> * master
>  remotes/origin/HEAD -> origin/master
>  remotes/origin/color
>  remotes/origin/master
> ```

Note the HEAD: it shows that the current branch _for the remote repository_ is the same as the current local branch.

To create a new branch, use

```bash
$ git branch <new name>
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git checkout`

This sets the HEAD to a specified commit hash or branch

To work on a previous commit:

```bash
$ git checkout <hash>
```

> ```bash
> Note: checking out '21e40ae300061b7849417f9bc8de783ebb17c7ba'.
>
> You are in 'detached HEAD' state. You can look around, make experimental
> changes and commit them, and you can discard any commits you make in this
> state without impacting any branches by performing another checkout.
>
> If you want to create a new branch to retain commits you create, you may
> do so (now or later) by using -b with the checkout command again. Example:
>
>  git checkout -b <new-branch-name>
>
> HEAD is now at 21e40ae Added style
> ```

To work on a different branch:

```bash
$ git checkout <branch>
```

> ```bash
> Switched to branch 'color'
> Your branch is up to date with 'origin/color'.
> ```

You can also create a new branch and work on it with:

```bash
$ git checkout -b <new branch name>
```

> ```bash
> Note: checking out '21e40ae300061b7849417f9bc8de783ebb17c7ba'.
>
> You are in 'detached HEAD' state. You can look around, make experimental
> changes and commit them, and you can discard any commits you make in this
> state without impacting any branches by performing another checkout.
>
> If you want to create a new branch to retain commits you create, you may
> do so (now or later) by using -b with the checkout command again. Example:
>
> git checkout -b <new-branch-name>
>
> HEAD is now at 21e40ae Added style
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git push`

This syncs the current local branch to the remote repository, on the same branch

```bash
$ git push -u origin <branch>
```

Please note that **origin** is just a label, it can be called anything (but really shouldn't...). "origin" is just the standard name for the remote repo's URL.

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git fetch`

Gets the content from the remote repository, **without** applying it.

```bash
$ git fetch
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git merge`

Incorporates fetched changes into the current branch

```bash
$ git merge
```

To incorporate a certain commit, use

```bash
$ git merge <hash>
```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git pull`

Fetches and merges changes from the remote to the specified branch

```bash
$ git pull origin <name>
```

> ```bash
> From https://github.com/alexsincai/git-github-presentation
> * branch            master     -> FETCH_HEAD
> Updating 21e40ae..78b5fbd
> Fast-forward
> index.html | 2 +-
> style.css  | 8 ++++++++
> 2 files changed, 9 insertions(+), 1 deletion(-)
> ```

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")

---

### `git remote`

Lets the local repository know about the remote repository

```bash
$ git remote add origin <URL>
```

As stated above, the name of the remote can be something other than **origin**, but it is that by convention; changing this will cause headaches down the road.

[Back to top](#git-and-github-basics "to top")
